
Verifying the installation of the Willows XPDK

The following steps are used to verify proper installation of the Willows Twin 
Libraries.  Each of the steps, and what is verified is identified in the table 
below.

1)	Running xwin			1 Run-Time Tools and Library installed 
					  and configured.
					2 The location of Windows directory is
					  correctly set.

2)	Building twin samples		1 Compiler Tools and Libraries installed
					  and configured.
					2 Environment variables correctly set
					  to target specific libraries and
					  header files.

Note:
No configuration file is needed to use the Willows Twin XPDK.  Only the
environment variables described in the installation section are required.

Running xwin

The xwin program is a windows binary emulator that is linked with the Willows
Twin XPDK library.  In its simplest form, it may be run by itself with no
arguments, as in:

xwin

In this form, xwin will put up a dialog box which allows the filesystem to
be browsed for a suitable windows binary to execute.  If the dialog box does
not come up on your display, then check the following:

	1) The DISPLAY variable is properly set.
	2) You have permission to execute applications that access the display.

If the application displays the message, "Cannot find library, xxxx.yyy.so",
then the library is not configured properly to work with the operating system; 
either the dynamic linker, ld.so, cannot find the library, or the 
LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable is not set.

Note:
The Willows Twin XPDK Libraries are released as shared libraries, and may 
require some systems to be upgraded to ELF support.  Additional information
about this may be found in the platform specific README file in the 
$TWINDIR/$TARGET directory.

The xwin binary emulator may also be run with command line arguments as in:

xwin <program name>

In this form, xwin will look for <program name>.exe in the current directory
and in the WINDOWS directory.  If the application cannot be found, a dialog
box will be displayed as appropriate.  The Willows Twin configuration file
can be modified to print the names of programs and their directories that are
searched.

Building twin samples

The Willows Twin XPDK provides samples that illustrate various aspects of the
Willows Twin XPDK.  These samples include generic makefiles that can be modified
as appropriate, samples that demonstrate how to use the compiler tools, rc and 
mdc, and samples that demonstrate how to access the Willows Twin help file
viewer, TwinView.

	WinDemo		Demonstrates creation of simple window.
	MsgDemo		Demonstrates messaging system using mouse and keyboard.
	DllDemo		Demonstrates building and accessing DLL's.
	HlpDemo		Demonstrates accessing TwinView, through WinHelp().
	DlgDemo		Demonstrates simple dialog box creation.
	GdiDemo		Demonstrates simple GDI calls, with brushes and pens.
	ClpDemo		Demonstrates use of clipboard to exchange data.
	PrtDemo		Demonstrates configuring and using printers.
	GuiDemo		Demonstrates altering the look and feel.
	
Once the TWINDIR and TARGET environment variables have been set, the samples
may be built by running make.  If the libraries are configured correctly, the
samples may be run to demonstrate various capabilities of the library.
