
This is a quick and dirty DEBUG tutorial.

Public Domain 2004 Michael Webster

Enhancements for FD DEBUG are put in square brackets: [FDDEBUG: ].

DEBUG was developed originally by Tim Paterson as a tool to aid in
his development of the 16-bit x86 OS that eventually became MS-DOS
Version 1.0

A version of DEBUG was included with every version of MS-DOS (and
PC-DOS, Compaq DOS, etc) and with every version of Windows through
Windows XP. 

DEBUG supports the 8086/8088 and 8087 registers and instruction sets.

[FDDEBUG: this debugger supports the 80386 registers and instruction sets
up to the Pentium Pro, including Floating Point instructions. The MMX
instruction set is missing, however.]

DEBUG command line
------------------
For the version of DEBUG that is included with Windows 98 SE, the
command line "DEBUG /?" returns:

  Runs Debug, a program testing and editing tool.

  DEBUG [[drive:][path]filename [testfile-parameters]]

   [drive:][path]filename Specifies the file you want to test.
   testfile-parameters    Specifies command-line information required
                          by the file you want to test.

  After Debug starts, type ? to display a list of debugging commands.

DEBUG commands
--------------
This section deals with the commands that DEBUG recognizes
while in command mode. Command mode, indicated by the presence of the
DEBUG command prompt (a hyphen), is the mode that DEBUG starts in.

For the more recent versions of DEBUG, you can cause DEBUG to display
a list of the commands and their parameters by entering a "?" at the
DEBUG command prompt.

DEBUG recognizes only hex numbers (without a trailing "H").

DEBUG maintains a set of variables that it uses to store a target
program's CPU registers. DEBUG initializes these variables each time
it is started. The variables for the AX, DX, BP, SI, and DI registers
are set to 0. If a target program or other file is loaded, the
variables for the BX and CX registers are set to the size of the
program or file. Otherwise, the variables for the BX and CX registers
are set to 0. If a target program is loaded, the variables for the
segment, IP, and SP registers are set to values appropriate for the
loaded program. Otherwise, the variables for the segment registers
are set to the segment address of the area of memory that DEBUG uses
to store the output from the Assemble command, the variable for IP
is set to 100h, and the variable for SP is set to FFFEh.

[FDDEBUG: this debugger supports the 32bit registers introduced with 
 the 80386. The high-words of these registers are initialized to zero
 on program start.]

Note that any DEBUG command that accepts a CPU register as a parameter
is actually using one of these variables. For the remainder of this
section, all register names refer to the associated variable.

For the commands that accept a range parameter, the parameter can be
used to specify a starting address, or a starting and ending address,
or a starting address and a length. To differentiate a length
parameter from an ending address, the length parameter must be
preceded with an "L". The starting address parameter can include a
segment register or a segment address constant, separated from the
offset address with a colon. Some examples using the Dump command:

-D 0
-D CS:0
-D F000:FFF6
-D 0 F
-D DS:100 102
-D SS:20 L 4

[FDDEBUG: the protected-mode aware version DEBUGX understand this 
 additional syntax:
 
#D $F000:FFF6

 which tells DEBUGX that F000 should be interpreted as a segment,
 not as a selector when debuggee is in protected-mode.
 
if debuggee is in protected-mode and the segment part of the starting
address is a 32bit selector, the offset parts of the starting and ending
address - as well as the length - can be 32bit. Examples:

-D DS:110000 110FFF
-D CS:400000 L 20000

]

---

The Assemble command (A) is used to enter assembly mode. In assembly
mode, DEBUG prompts for each assembly language statement and converts
the statement into machine code that is then stored in memory. The
optional start address specifies the address at which to assemble the
first instruction. The default start address is 100h. A blank line
entered at the prompt causes DEBUG to exit assembly mode.

Syntax: A [address]

---

The Compare command (C) compares two memory regions. All differences will be
listed, both addresses are displayed, with their respective data bytes.
Example:

-C 0100 l 2 0200
1234:0100  E9  65  1234:0200
1234:0101  01  02  1234:0201

Syntax: C range address

---

The Dump command (D), when used without a parameter, causes DEBUG
to display the contents of the 128-byte block of memory starting at
CS:IP if a target program is loaded, or starting at CS:100h if no
target program is loaded. The optional range parameter can be used
to specify a starting address, or a starting and ending address, or
a starting address and a length. Subsequent Dump commands without a
parameter cause DEBUG to display the contents of the 128-byte block
of memory following the block displayed by the previous Dump command.

[FDDEBUG: there is a autorepeat function implemented for D. If the last
 command entered was Dump, pressing a single ENTER will count as a
 subsequent Dump command.]

Syntax: D [range]

[FDDEBUG: 
---

DEBUGX only: the Dump Interrupt (DI) command displays interrupt vectors in
real/v86-mode and DPMI interrupt (+exception) vectors in protected-mode.
Examples:

Display interrupt 00 in real-mode:

-DI 0
int 00 02F8:03F8

Display interrupt and exception vectors 08-0B in 32bit protected-mode:

#DI 8 4
int 08 00C7:00000D28 00C7:00001228
int 09 00C7:00000D2D 00C7:0000122D
int 0A 00C7:00000D32 00C7:00001232
int 0B 00C7:00000D37 00C7:00001237

Syntax: DI vector [count]

---

DEBUGX only: the Dump LDT descriptor (DL) command displays DPMI LDT
descriptors. Example:

#dl 84 2
0084 base=00110800 limit=0000014F attr=00F2
008C base=00110000 limit=000007FF attr=00F3

DL can also be used to display limit and attributes of those GDT 
descriptors which are accessible by the client. Example:

#dl 18 3
0018 base=???????? limit=FFFFFFFF attr=CFFB
0020 base=???????? limit=FFFFFFFF attr=CFF3
0028 base=???????? limit=???????? attr=????

Syntax: DL selector [count]

---

The Dump MCBs (DM) displays the current DOS PSP and the DOS Memory 
Control Block (MCB) chain.
Example:

PSP:1A27
0219 4D 0008 04D6 SD
06F0 4D 06F1 00BA COMMAND
07AB 4D 0000 0007 
07B3 4D 06F1 0047 COMMAND
07FB 4D 0000 0039 
...

First value is the segment address of the MCB, followed by 4D/5A, the
owner and size of the MCB and finally the 8-byte name of the owner.
An owner of 0000 means that this MCB describes a free memory block.

Syntax: DM

---

DEBUGX only: The Dump eXtended memory command (DX) allows to examine
the full range of memory. It uses Interrupt 15h, AH=87h for extended
memory access. It should be noted that, when running under a Expanded
Memory Manager (EMM), Interrupt 15h, AH=87h behaves slightly inconsistent:
addresses below 110000h are regarded as linear, while addresses >= 110000h
are regarded as physical.

Syntax: DX [address]
]
---

The Enter command (E) is used to enter data into memory. The required
address parameter specifies the starting location at which to enter
the data. If the address parameter does not specify a segment, DEBUG
uses DS. If the optional list parameter is not included, DEBUG
displays the byte value at the specified address and prompts for a
new value. The spacebar or minus key can be used to move to the next
or previous byte. Pressing the Enter key without entering a value
terminates the command. If the list parameter is included, it can
contain up to 8 byte values separated by spaces, commas, or tabs,
and/or a case significant string enclosed in single or double quotes.

Examples:

-E 100 01 02 03
-E 100 'ABC'
-E 100 'ABC' 0

Syntax: E address [list]

---

The Fill command (F) fills a memory regions with a byte pattern.
To fill for example the first 8000h bytes of current data segment
with pattern 55 AA, enter:

-F 0 L 8000 55 AA

Syntax: F range list

---

The Go command (G), when used without a parameter, causes DEBUG to
copy the contents of the register variables to the actual CPU
registers and effectively jump to the instruction at CS:IP, giving
full control to the program being debugged. DEBUG will reassert
control when the program terminates normally, or DEBUG will not
reassert control. The optional address parameter can be used to
specify the starting address. The optional breakpoint list can
be used to specify up to 10 temporary breakpoint addresses.
To differentiate the address parameter from the breakpoint list,
the address parameter must be preceded with an "=". Note that the
breakpoint addresses must coincide with the start of a valid
instruction. To resume execution after a breakpoint, use the Go
command without a parameter.

Syntax: G [=address] [break0 break1...]

---

The Hex command (H) computes the sum and difference of two hex
numbers.

Syntax: H value1 value2

[FDDEBUG: the original DEBUG will handle WORD values only, FD DEBUG
 will accept DWORD values.]

---

The Input command (I) causes DEBUG to read and display the value
from the 8-bit I/O port specified by the required port parameter.

Syntax: I port

[FDDEBUG: besides I there exists IW/ID to read a WORD/DWORD from
 a 16-bit/32-bit port. ID is available on machines with a 80386+ cpu
 only.]

---

The Load command (L) is used to load a file into memory. The file to
load is specified with the Name command (N). The optional address
parameter specifies the load address. The default load address is
CS:100 for all files other than EXE files, for which information in
the file header determines the load address. After DEBUG loads the
file it sets BX:CX to the file size in bytes. Recent versions of
DEBUG display "Extended Error 1282" if the specified file cannot be
found.

Syntax: L [address]

The Load command can also be used to load one or more logical sectors
from a disk drive into DEBUG's memory. The drive should be specified
as 0=A, 1=B, 2=C etc.

Syntax: L address drive startsector numberofsectors

[FDDEBUG: L with logical sectors on Windows XP will work for DEBUGX only.]
---

The Move command (M) copies a memory region to another location. If
source and destination overlap, parts of the source will be overwritten.

Syntax: M range address

---

The Name command (N) is used to input a filename (actually, a file
specification that can include a drive and a path) for a subsequent
Load or Write command. Because the Name command uses the simulated 
PSP as a buffer, it can also be used to enter command line arguments
 and/or switches for the program being debugged.

Syntax: N filespec [arguments]

---

The Output command (O) causes DEBUG to write the byte specified by
the required byte parameter to the 8-bit I/O port specified by the
required port parameter (O port byte)

Syntax: O port byte

[FDDEBUG: besides O there exists OW/OD to write a WORD/DWORD to
a 16-bit/32-bit port. OD is available on machines with a 80386+ cpu
only.]

---

The Proceed command (P) functions like the Trace command (T) for all
instructions other than the repeat (REP) string, LOOP, procedure
CALL, and interrupt call (INT) instructions. For a repeat string
instruction, DEBUG executes the instruction to completion. For a
LOOP instruction, DEBUG executes the entire loop to completion.
For a procedure CALL or an interrupt call instruction, DEBUG
executes the entire call up to and including the return instruction.
After execution is complete, DEBUG continues as it does for the
Trace command.

Syntax: P [=address] [number]

---

The Quit command (Q) should be a no-brainer.

Syntax: Q

---

The Register command (R), when used without a parameter, causes
DEBUG to display the contents of the target program's CPU registers.
The optional register parameter will cause DEBUG to display the
contents of the register and prompt for a new value. When DEBUG
displays the contents of the registers, it encodes the processor
flags as follows:

   Flag              Set   Clear
   -----------------------------
   Overflow          OV    NV
   Direction         DN    UP
   Interrupt         EI    DI
   Sign              NG    PL
   Zero              ZR    NZ
   Auxiliary Carry   AC    NA
   Parity            PE    PO
   Carry             CY    NC

Syntax: R [register]

[FDDEBUG: if the register argument is given, it can be immediately
followed by the new value . No prompt will appear then.

Syntax: R [register] [value]

---

The RN command display the content of the floating point registers. DEBUGX
renders the content of these registers in "readable" floating point format,
DEBUG displays the content in raw hex format (because the rendering code
requires quite some space and DEBUG is intended to be kept small in size).

Syntax: RN

---

The RX command is active if the current cpu is a 80386 or better. Then 
RX will toggle between the simple 16bit register display (which is the 
default) and the full 32bit register display.

Syntax: RX

---
]

Search (S) is  used  to find the occurrence of a specific byte or series
of bytes within a segment. For example, to find all occurrences of 'CD 21'
in memory region DS:100-1FF, enter:

-S 100 l 100 CD 21
 1234:0122
 1234:01EC

Or, to find all strings "hello" in DS:0100-FFFF, enter

-S 100 FFFF 'hello'
 1234:0122
 1234:1221
 1234:EADC

Syntax: S range list

---

The Trace command (T), when used without a parameter, causes DEBUG
to execute the instruction at CS:IP. Before the instruction is
executed, the contents of the register variables are copied to the
actual CPU registers. After the instruction has executed, and updated
the actual CPU registers (including IP), the contents of the actual
CPU registers are copied back to the register variables and the
contents of these variables are displayed. The optional address
parameter can be used to specify the starting address. The optional
count parameter can be used to specify the number of instructions to
execute. To differentiate the address parameter from the count
parameter, the address parameter must be preceded with an "=". Note
that the first byte at the specified address must be the start of a
valid instruction.

Syntax: T [=address] [number]

[FDDEBUG: if the current CS:IP points to an INT opcode, FDDEBUG's
 behaviour depends on the current value of the TM option. If it 
 is 0 (the default), the debugger will regain control when the 
 INT has been processed. If TM is 1, the debugger will step "into"
 the INT.
 Furthermore, autorepeat is active for T. That is, if the last 
 command was T, a single ENTER will count as a repeated T command.]

---

The Unassemble command (U), when used without any parameter, causes
DEBUG to read approximately 32 bytes of memory starting at the initial
CS:IP values specified in the file header if an EXE file is loaded,
or starting at CS:100h if any other type of file or no file is loaded.
For each instruction in this memory, DEBUG disassembles (translates
from machine code to assembly language) the instruction and displays
the address, the machine code, and the corresponding assembly language.
The optional range parameter can be used to specify a starting address,
or a starting and ending address, or a starting address and a length.
Subsequent Unassemble commands without any parameter cause DEBUG to
start at the instruction following the last instruction processed by
the previous Unassemble command.

[FDDEBUG:  Autorepeat is active for U. That is, if the last command 
 was U, a single ENTER will count as a repeated U command.]

Syntax: U [range]

---

The Write command (W) causes DEBUG to write BX:CX bytes to the output
file. The optional address parameter specifies the starting source
address. The default starting source address is 100h. Note that
loading a file from the DEBUG command line or with the Load command
will set BX:CX to the size of the file, a feature clearly intended
to aid in the patching of executables.

Syntax: W [address]

---

The Write command can also be used to write one or more logical
sectors to a disk drive. The drive should be specified as for
the Load command.

Syntax: W address drive startsector numberofsectors

WARNING: You should know what you are doing when using this command.
If used inappropriately, W can cause severe data losses.

[FDDEBUG: W with logical sectors on Windows XP will work for DEBUGX only.]
---

For the Trace, Proceed, and Register commands, after DEBUG completes
the operations described above, it disassembles the next instruction
and displays the address of the instruction, the machine code, and
the corresponding assembly language. For the Trace and Proceed
commands, if the instruction contains a memory operand, DEBUG displays
the address that the operand refers to and the contents of that
address. The segment register specified in the address is the default
segment register for the instruction, or the segment register
specified by a segment override.
Syntax:

One perhaps non-obvious use for the Register command would be to
control the starting address for the next Trace or Proceed command
by loading a new value into CS and/or IP. And along the same lines,
non-obvious uses for the Assemble and Enter commands would be to
alter the instructions and/or data for the program being debugged.

When DEBUG processes a Trace, Proceed, Register, or Unassemble command,
it displays assembly language (as described above) for any byte value
or sequence of byte values that it recognizes as a valid instruction.
For any other byte value, DEBUG displays the DB pseudoinstruction
followed by the byte value. DEBUG may fail to recognize a byte value
as part of a valid instruction for any of the following reasons:

   The byte is part of an instruction that is specific to a later
   generation x86 processor.

   The disassembly process did not start at the first byte of a
   valid instruction.

   The byte is data.

Note that DEBUG's ability to execute an instruction (for the Trace
and Proceed commands) does not depend on its ability to recognize the
instruction.

Instruction operands
--------------------
The instruction operands are the objects on which the instruction
"operates". For DEBUG, these objects can be constants, registers, or
memory. A memory operand specifies the offset address of the data to
operate on. To differentiate memory operands from constants, memory
operands must be enclosed in square brackets.

For a direct memory operand, the offset address of the data is
specified in the operand. For an indirect memory operand, the offset
address of the data is calculated at run-time using the contents of
one or two registers and an optional displacement. In 16bit code, the
registers can be a base register (BX or BP) or an index register (SI or DI),
or one of each. The following examples illustrate the differences
between constant operands, register operands, direct memory operands,
and indirect memory operands:

   MOV   AX,100   ; Moves the value 100 into AX
   MOV   AX,BX    ; Copies the value in BX to AX 
   MOV   AX,[100] ; Copies the word at DS:100 to AX
   MOV   AL,[BP+2]; Copies the byte at DS:BP+2 to AL

   JMP   100      ; Destination offset is 100
   JMP   AX       ; Destination offset is the value in AX
   JMP   [100]    ; Destination offset is the word at DS:100
   JMP   [BX]     ; Destination offset is the word at DS:BX
   JMP   [BX+4]   ; Destination offset is the word at DS:BX+4

   ; Near calls work just like the jump instructions above.

DEBUG statements
----------------
This section deals with the statements that DEBUG recognizes while
in assembly mode.

Each statement occupies a single line. For each statement, the first
character that is not a space or a tab must be a semicolon or the
start of a valid instruction mnemonic. A semicolon, at the start of
a statement or anywhere within a statement, causes DEBUG to ignore
the remainder of the line.

As previously noted, DEBUG recognizes only hex numbers (without a
trailing "H").

As previously noted, memory operands must be enclosed in square
brackets.

In MS-DOS Debug, segment override prefixes must be placed on the line
preceding the prefixed instruction. For example:

   ES:
   MOV  AX,[100]
   
[FDDEBUG: FD Debug rejects this format. Here the prefix is entered on the
very same line:

   MOV  AX,ES:[100]
]

In addition to the items detailed above, DEBUG statements can include
the following:

   The CPU register names (other than IP):
      AX BX CX DX
      AL AH BL BH CL CH DL DH
      SP BP
      SI DI
      CS ES DS SS
      
   [FDDEBUG: if cpu is 80386 or better, the extended registers are
    recognised as well: EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI. 
    Furthermore, there are 2 new segment registers, FS and GS.]

   The words NEAR (or NE) and FAR, optionally followed by PTR,
   which are used to override the default forms of the CALL and JMP
   instructions. The default form of a JMP instruction can be short,
   near, or far, depending on the destination. The default form of a
   CALL instruction can be near or far, depending on the destination.
   Note that DEBUG will default to far only if the destination is
   recognizable as a far address, which means that it must be a
   constant of the form segment:offset (for example, "JMP F000:FFF0").
   If the destination is specified by a memory operand (for example,
   "JMP  [100]"), DEBUG will default to near. The optional PTR has
   no effect on the assembly process.

   The words BYTE (or BY) and WORD (or WO) [FDDEBUG: and DWORD (or DW)],
   optionally followed by PTR, which are used to specify the type for
   memory data. For instructions that take two operands, DEBUG will 
   assume that the type for the data specified by a memory operand matches
   the type for the other operand. For instructions that take one operand,
   the type must be specified. The optional PTR has no effect on
   the assembly process.

   [FDDEBUG: for floating point opcodes, there exist 3 additional memory
   types, FLOAT (or FL), DOUBLE (or DO) and TBYTE (or TB):
       FLD  FLOAT [100]
       FSTP DOUBLE [100]
       FSTP TBYTE [100]
   ]

   The DB and DW [FDDEBUG: and DD] pseudoinstructions, which are used
   to assemble byte and word values. These pseudoinstructions are normally
   used to set aside space for and initialize data. They can also be used
   to synthesize instructions that DEBUG cannot assemble. Note that
   DEBUG will not allow a trailing comment on the same line as one of
   these pseudoinstructions.

   The word ORG, used to set (or change) the starting address for the
   assembly of instructions. Note that ORG may not be supported by
   early versions of DEBUG.

   DEBUG checks for errors as it assembles each statement. If an error
   is detected, DEBUG stops assembling the statement and displays
   "^ Error" on the line following the statement. The position of the
   caret indicates the location in the statement where DEBUG detected
   the error.

DEBUG scripts
-------------
Because DEBUG uses the standard input and output devices, and because
these devices can be redirected, DEBUG can be made to input from
and/or output to a text file. This makes it possible to place DEBUG
commands and statements in a text file, a so-called DEBUG script, and
submit the file to DEBUG for processing. This batch file can be used
to automate the process:

ASM.BAT:
@echo off
if "%1" == "" goto noarg
if exist %1.txt goto defext
if "%2" == "l" goto list1
if "%2" == "L" goto list1
debug < %1 | more
goto end
:list1
debug < %1 > %1.LST
goto end
:defext
if "%2" == "l" goto list2
if "%2" == "L" goto list2
debug < %1.txt | more
goto end
:list2
debug < %1.txt > %1.LST
goto end
:noarg
echo.
echo Assembles DEBUG script files
echo.
echo Usage:
echo.
echo   ASM filename[.extension] [L]
echo.
echo Extension defaults to .TXT
echo L sends output to filename.LST
:end

---

This is an example script for a Hello World program (in this
and the following examples, the leading Name commands are used
to place comments in the script outside of assembly mode without
causing DEBUG to return an error):

N HELLO.TXT
N
N This is a DEBUG script that will generate HELLO.COM.
N
N HELLO.COM
A
   mov	ah,9
   mov	dx,109
   int	21
   int	20
   db	'Hello World$'

RCX
015
W
Q

---

Because DEBUG is not a symbolic assembler, you must code all operands
that represent memory addresses manually. These memory addresses
include data addresses and jump, loop, and call destination addresses.
To do this reasonably you must assemble your code twice. In the script
file for the first assembly, use a place holder value for each of
these operands. Note that the placeholder values must be selected
such that all displacements will be within the allowable range.
Using the output from the first (error free) assembly, replace the
placeholders in the script file with the actual addresses, and do the
final assembly.

This is the output for the first assembly of the Hello World program,
using place holder values that were essentially guesses:

-N HELLO.TXT
-N
-N This is a DEBUG script that will generate HELLO.COM.
-N
-N HELLO.COM
-A
1078:0100         mov     ah,9
1078:0102         mov     dx,110
1078:0105         int     21
1078:0107         int     20
1078:0109         db      'Hello World$'
1078:0115
-RCX
CX 0000
:020
-W
Writing 00020 bytes
-Q

---

This is another DEBUG script that can be used to write a boot
sector to a diskette:

N LOADIT.TXT
N This is a DEBUG script that will copy BOOTCODE.BIN
N to the first sector of drive A. Note that this will
N work only if the OS recognizes the diskette as
N having a valid format.
N BOOTCODE.BIN
L 100
W 100 0 0 1
Q

---

