     FreeLdr design.
     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
author: Valery V. Sedletski,
aka valerius,
2007, Nov 12-Dec 11.

     FreeLdr  is  a generic operating system loader, designed to be capable of
loading  DOS-like OSes (primarily, OS/2), as well as microkernel OSes (osFree,
DROPS  or  any  L4-based  OS)  and traditional monolithic OSes, like Linux. It
shares  many  common  features  with  GRUB, supports multiboot protocol and is
partly  based  on GRUB sources. Though, it is greatly re-designed and includes
many ideas from OS/2 boot process.

History of the project.

     In  1999,  David  Zimmerli  wrote  an article in EDM/2 about a project to
replace   os2ldr   (http://www.edm2.com/).   He   wrote  a  small  rudimentary
os2ldr-like   program,   which   was   supposed   to   begin   a  free  os2ldr
reimplementation  from  scratch. This program was started by the bootblock and
tested  the  micro-FSD  functions,  opening a file and showing parameters, got
from  the  bootblock.  It was a stub for a loader. These sources were taken by
osFree  team  and  they  were  used  as  a  starting  point  for osFree loader
implementation. The osFree loader, like Zimmerli's program, is called FreeLdr.
We  took  this  name  because  it  reflects  the  fact that our loader is free
software  and  is  a loader intended for use with osFree operating system. The
first  version  was  continued in 2003 by Yuri Prokushev and in 2005 by Sascha
Schmidt.  Then  the development was paused. Sascha started to port portions of
GRUB  sources  to incorporate multiboot protocol support, but did not finished
the  work. In the end of 2006, I took their results and finished the micro-FSD
functions  and  combined  them with completed working version of GRUB routines
for multiboot loading. The loader worked. The L4 microkernel was loading using
micro-FSD  and  started  by  kickstart bootstrapper. The loader worked in real
mode  and  GRUB routines were ported to a realmode 16-bit environment (GRUB is
mostly 32-bit).

     The  last  time,  the  design  was  reworked and now I was redesigned the
loader.  It  was  decided  to  move most parts to 32-bits protected mode. Only
small  part  continues  to work in 16-bit real mode and is intended to be BIOS
functions  specific.  This  was  made such a way because of the wish to make a
possibility  to  easily  port  to  other  kinds of firmware, like EFI. So, the
16-bit  portion must be kept as small as possible. Also, it was suggested that
32-bit  code  has  less  limitations  and is easier to develop and extend (the
extensions  to  the loader are easier to develop as in 32-bit code there is no
64 Kb segments and 640 Kb limit for available memory).

     Now  the new loader is partly working. I ported filesystem-specific parts
of GRUB and made 32-bit micro-FSD's from them. The filesystem specific part is
designed  as  a separate small (several kilobytes) module, and it is separated
from  generic  part.  Now  isofs micro-FSD is starting os2ldr and os2ldr loads
OS/2 kernel successfuly. But the missing part now is a mini-FSD.

     When  designing  FreeLdr,  there were the following design goals in mind,
which determined the overall architecture of the loader:

     1)  Modularity.  The  loader  must  consist  of  several parts, which are
replaceable  by  other  parts, having the same interfaces with the rest of the
loader.

     2)  To be OS-neutral. Possibility to load almost any OS. For that reason,
FreeLdr  employs  a  multiboot protocol, the common protocol between OS loader
and OS kernel, introduced in GRUB.

     3) Compatibility with interfaces of traditional OS/2 loader, micro-FSD's.

     4)  Multiboot  protocol  compliance.  (it is needed by L4, at least). But
multiboot-specific  part  of the loader must be replaceable with standard OS/2
loader (os2ldr).

     5)   Like  os2ldr,  the  FreeLdr  must  be  independent  from  filesystem
structure.  This  implies  the  use  of  BlackBox  metaphor.  The  blackbox is
something,  doing  its  work  internally and not exposing its internals to the
outside.  From  the  software  point  of  view,  the  blackbox  is  a program,
incapsulating  its  inner  workings and exposing only its interfaces. The main
kind  of  a  blackbox is uFSD (micro-FSD, micro File System Driver), the small
program,  designed  to  abstract the loader from the filesystem structure. The
loader  only  uses four uFSD functions to read files from the disk and details
of internal filesystem structure are hidden from the loader.

     6)  And  more.  The FreeLdr goes even further, it introduces new kinds of
blackboxes.  There is a need to hide more details from the loader a) There are
uXFD's  (micro  eXecutable Format Drivers), which abstract the loader from the
structure of executable files; b) There are uDC's (micro De-Compressors) which
are  responsible  for  transparent uncompressing of files, read from the disk.
They  abstract  the loader from the structure of compressed formats, like ZIP,
GZIP,  BZIP2  etc. GZIP uDC will be made also from GRUB sources (GRUB includes
support  for  reading  GZIP-compressed files and this will be transformed into
modular  design  as  a uDC) c) and also there are uPP's, micro Pre-Processors,
responsible  for  transparently  substituting  variables in text files and for
including one file into another (see below).

     uFSD's  and  uXFD's  are  parts  of IFS (installable file system) and IIF
(installable  image  format)  sybsystems, respectively. Both subsystems have a
portion in kernel and in loader. Their goals are the support of arbitrary file
systems  or executable formats. In contrast, GRUB is designed to be monolithic
(like UNIX kernel) and had no modularity at all. All filesystem-specific parts
of  the  loader  was  statically  linked in loader executable. The list of all
filesystems  was  hardcoded,  and  to add a new filesystem, the loader must be
recompiled. Also, file compression is hardcoded and executable formats support
was  also hardcoded. In FreeLdr, these parts are independent of the loader. To
add  a  new  uFSD,  or uXFD, or uPP or uDC, no loader recompile is needed. The
only  needed  thing  is  a  new entry in pre-loader INI file, describing a new
module.

     7)  The  FreeLdr  takes  advantage  of  combined "loader and bootmanager"
approach,  it means that it allows to choose operating system to be loaded and
in  the same time it not only chooses a boot partition (the bootmanager role),
but also loads files from disk (the loader role). These roles are combined, so
when  user  chooses  the  boot  menu  item,  it  also  chooses  a  set of boot
parameters,  which  the  loader  then  passes to the operating system. So, the
loader  is  not  only chooses OS to load and loads OS files from disk, it also
allows  the  user to choose OS configuration parameters and passes them to the
OS.

     8) The bootmanager functionality of FreeLdr is designed to be replaceable
by standard OS/2 bootmanager. So, if the user more likes the OS/2 bootmanager,
it  can switch off the loader bootmanager functionality (but then it loses the
possibility to pass the OS boot parameters from the bootmanager menu) When the
bootmanager  functionality  is  switched off, the boot menu is simply disabled
and the fixed boot script is executed.

     9) The loader must have an abstraction layer hiding 16-bit BIOS calls and
the firmware (BIOS or EFI) from the main part of the loader.

     By  4-th  and  9-th  reasons,  the decision was made that the loader must
consist  of,  as minimum, two parts. The second part is interchangable, it may
be  os2ldr,  or  a  multiboot loader (it is called stage1). The first part was
called the pre-loader (It is called also stage0). It is started before stage1.
It must implement the common feature set for os2ldr and multiboot loader.

     The  common  features  used  by  multiboot loader and os2ldr are a) uFSD,
uXFD, uDC and uPP. It could be useful if we could use them in old os2ldr too.

     Also,  the  pre-loader serves as an abstraction layer between the machine
firmware and stage1 of the loader.

     The  pre-loader in FreeLdr takes place of standard micro-FSD in OS/2 boot
sequence.

Loader structure.
-----------------

     The  loader consists of several parts, or modules. First, loader consists
of  loader itself, /boot/freeldr/freeldr module and a pre-loader. A pre-loader
shields  a  main module from knowing different low-level details. It abstracts
the  loader from filesystem structure, the structure of executable modules and
compression  formats;  from  structure  of  tags  in text files, read from the
filesystem, and from details of accessing different kinds of terminals.

     A  pre-loader  does  its  tasks by loading different blackboxes and using
their functions. So, the pre-loader is a sort of blackbox manager.

Loader modules structure.
-------------------------

     Each  loader  module  (a main module, a pre-loader stages and blackboxes)
have similar structure. The module is divided into two main parts. The main of
them is a part containing 32-bit protected mode executable code. It goes after
small  16-bit  real/protected  mode  part.  The  32-bit part can use call_rm()
function  to  switch into real mode and execute a function in 16-bit part. For
this,  when  module  loads  into  memory,  the  module  can  be  loaded at any
address,  including addresses above 1 Mb. Then 16-bit part is copied to buffer
below 1 Mb, so, it can be executed in real mode.

     16-bit  module  part starts with a sort of header. The header starts from
32-bit  call  instruction  which  jumps to init() function at the beginning of
32-bit  part.  After  returning  from  init()  function,  RET  instruction  is
executed and control is returned to the caller. So, the code looks like this:

        call init()
        ret

     Note.  These  two  32-bit  instructions  are  situated at the 16-bit code
segment. It is done for the following purpose: The module is loaded first into
the  buffer  and  and  to call init() function, the starting module address is
called.  The  call  instruction  at  the module start just routes this call to
correct init() function address.

After the two starting instructions, at the offset of 8h, goes the signature
'$header$'. Then follows a load address of 16-bit part (below 1 Mb). It goes
at the offset of 10h. Then, at the offset of 20h, the header ends.


Loader module initialization.
-----------------------------

     Each module is linked at some default base address. When it is loaded, it
is  first  applied  the  fixups,  according  module .rel file. Then the 16-bit
part is copied below 1 Mb at the address, specified in its header. After this,
The  init()  function  is  called  by calling the module starting address. The
init()  function  is  given  a pointer to some structure (in most cases, it is
lip1  structure).  This  function  main purpose is to set up fields of a given
structure  to  point at module entry points. Such a way, other parts of loader
can obtain information about module entry points. Also, init() function can do
other  initialization tasks, such as setting up GDT descriptors needed by this
module.  After calling the init() function the module is ready to use by other
parts of the loader.

The pre-loader.
---------------

1. Blackboxes.

i)   The uPP (micro preprocessor).

     The  idea of this feature is to have a small text file preprocessor (like
C  preprocessor,  or  similar, incorporated into freeldr_open() function (used
for  opening  files  by  uFSD).  This  idea  is inspired by Veit Kannegieser's
program,  called  os2csm.  Os2csm  starts before os2ldr and presents a menu to
user.  User  selects  options from menu. Parameters, set by user are passed to
OS/2  kernel  and  are  substituted  in  config.sys like preprocessor defines.
Os2csm  hooks  onto  BIOS  int  13h  routines  and  when  config.sys  is read,
itsubstitutes variables in it.

     The uPP has similar idea. But unlike os2csm, it hooks onto freeldr_open()
routine,  not  int 13h. This allows to preprocess not only config.sys, but any
other text file.

     The  uPP is a common way to pass variables, set by user through menus, or
ones, defined in a boot script, to OS programs through substituting these vars
values  in  program  command  line  or  in its configuration files. It is very
useful  feature, you can see it in work in eComstation Demo CD, implemented in
os2csm.  We'd  like  to have such feature embedded in our loader as a standard
feature.

ii)  The uDC (micro decompressor)

     The  GRUB  feature to load files, compressed by GZIP, and decompress them
while  reading is also very useful. It is good for any kind of files. For some
executable  file formats, like LX, there is a built-in compression algorithms.
For  other formats, like ELF, there is not. So, to save disk space (especially
on  floppies),  we  could use this feature. But it would be more convenient to
implement  this  feature  as  a  blackbox,  and do it modular, not to hardcode
compression  algorithm in loader, like in GRUB, but make it possible to easily
add new compression algorithms without the need of recompile.

iii) The uXFD (micro executable format driver)

     Os2ldr  contains  routines for loading and relocating executable files of
LX  and  NE  formats. In GRUB, there is algorithms of loading of ELF and a.out
formats.  In  both  cases,  these  algorithms  are hardcoded, and to add a new
format, the loader must be recompiled. It would be very attractive feature, if
we  could  do  this  modularily,  without  recompile. So, the decision suggest
itself, to add executable format loading algorithms as a new kind of blackbox.

     The uXFD has a one main function, a load() one, which takes a file image,
loaded  in  memory,  the  relocation  base address; loads and relocates it and
returns ss:esp, cs:eip and other parameters. Also, it returns a result code.

iv)  The uFSD (micro file system driver)

     The  uFSD  is the main kind of blackbox. I think, no need to explain, why
it can be useful. We know its advantages from the OS/2 boot process.

v)   The  uT (micro terminal driver or terminal blackbox)

     Its  purpose  is  to abstract the loader from terminal access details. It
provides  a  common  interface  to  input/output symbols to different kinds of
terminals,  such  as  vga/ega  console,  hercules  console, serial console and
others.

     All  blackbox  kinds  allow  us  to avoid dependencies of the loader from
different  kinds  of formats. The new formats can be added at any time without
the  need  in  recompile.  In  contrast, The GRUB has a monolithic design. The
least  change  in  loader  needs  a  recompile.  The GRUB is a good loader, it
introduces  almost  universal  protocol between loader and kernel and targeted
primarily  at  microkernel systems (The GRUB was designed specifically for GNU
HURD,  not  Linux, as it commonly considered). But although it is designed for
modular microkernel system, it is monolithic by itself. And this is really bad
:(.  The NTLDR in Windows is also designed to be monolithic. The NTLDR (unlike
the  os2ldr)  runs  in  protected mode. There are a realmode filesystem access
functions in bootblock, by use of which the NTLDR is read from disk. But these
functions  (analogous  to micro-FSD from OS/2) are not passed to NTLDR and are
not  used  by  NTLDR  at  all.  Instead, there are a protected mode filesystem
functions  in  NTLDR, by which the loader reads files, and these functions are
hardcoded.  This  case  is even worse than GRUB's. For a different filesystem,
there  must  be  a separate version of NTLDR -- for fat32 the one,for NTFS the
other. The NTLDR is tied to a filesystem type. In the case of FreeLdr, we have
the  choice  in  filesystem  and even to add a new filesystem, no recompile is
needed.
